---
label: Cat. 4
title: Decorative Collar with Busts of Celestial Deities
short_title: Short title
weight: 104
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 4
type: entry
abstract:
---
This object may be a decorative attachment for the shaft of a ceremonial scepter or perhaps a military standard. The exterior is decorated with six separately cast busts: three facing lion heads terminating in acanthus foliage, alternating with three facing busts of celestial deities. First, the moon goddess Luna wearing a chiton and veil over her shoulder, with her hair pulled back and a crescent moon above her brow. Next, a bearded and veiled Saturn. The head of the third bust is missing, but may represent Sol. He wears a cloak (chlamys) fastened at his shoulder. The imagery implies a connection to the cult of Mithras, an eastern religion that quickly spread across the Roman Empire in part due to its popularity with soldiers, attracted by the promise of life after death.
The entire outer surface of the collar is mercury gilded. To mercury gild a metal object, the craftsman first makes an amalgam of gold and mercury and paints it onto the surface of the object. The object is then fired at a relatively low temperature, below the melting point of the silver, which drives a great deal of the mercury away and bonds the gold to the metal below. This layer of gold is incredibly thin, about 2 – 20 microns, and can contain 8-25% mercury. Because this layer is so thin, tarnish of the silver below can form on top of the gilding. 
The same chemical compound used to reduce tarnish on the Sasanian bowl was used on the surface of the collar. This chemical compound is a toxic carcinogen, so personal protection like gloves, a respirator, and protective were necessary. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}


{{< /q-class >}}
