---
label: Exhibit 1
title: Conical Cup (Mastos)
short_title: Conical Cup (Mastos)
type: entry
weight: 111
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 1
---

Typically referred to as *mastoi* (singular, *mastos*) due to the
breast-like form, cups of this shape made from precious metal, ceramic,
and glass were popular in the Hellenistic period, especially in the
eastern Mediterranean. This example has been raised from a single sheet
of silver and is decorated on the interior with a turned rim. Versions
made from silver such as this represented costly luxuries and would have
been used at elite banquets as a form of status display. Some were then
buried in tombs or dedicated in temples.

The before treatment image of the cup is an excellent example of the
wide array of interference colors silver sulfide can produce -- blue,
yellow, purple, green. Because of this obscuring dark layer, the object
was carefully examined under the microscope prior to treatment to ensure
there was no mercury gilding present. Mechanical reduction with a
polishing compound is only appropriate for objects with robust surfaces
that can handle such a treatment, and is therefore not appropriate for
thin, damaged mercury gilded surfaces.

This object has multiple inscriptions in Greek script, including the
name, "SOSYLOU" ("Of Sosylos"), and a number, "ND" ("54 \[drachmas\]").
Inscribed silver is rare, but a few examples of similar vessels with
comparable inscriptions survive from Hellenized Near Eastern kingdoms.
The first inscription gives the name of the presumed owner, Sosylos. The
second numerical inscription gives the cup's weight in units of
currency, 54 drachmas. This indicates that the cup was weighed using the
Parthian weight standard, implying a Near Eastern context. In the RTI
image, the guidelines that were scratched into the surface before the
final punching of the owner's name are visible.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

{{< /q-class >}}
