---
label: Exhibit 2
title: Drinking Cup (Skyphos)
short_title: Drinking Cup (Skyphos)
type: entry
class: side-by-side
weight: 112
object:
  - id: 2
---

Ornately decorated silver drinking vessels, typically made in pairs,
were highly prized luxuries in Roman antiquity and would have been used
at elite banquets to display the owner's wealth and status. Roman
authors such as Vergil and Petronius note that these cups also prompted
diners to demonstrate their cultured education by discussing the
mythological and philosophical imagery that decorated them.

This double-walled cup has repoussé and chased decoration on the
exterior with an undecorated inner liner. Repoussé and chasing are
techniques used together for shaping metal, where the sheet is hammered
on the back to create a design (repoussé) and then worked on the front
to further define the shape (chasing). This cup is decorated with
spiraling acanthus tendrils interspersed with birds. These motifs are
typical of the Augustan and Julio-Claudian periods and evoke a world of
natural abundance and prosperity that helped create an atmosphere of
luxurious leisure-time for its wealthy viewer.

The cup was lightly, selectively polished under magnification. While
polishing, remnants of mercury gilding were observed on areas of raised
decoration. Age, archaeological context, and previous campaigns of
cleaning have caused the gilded surface to abrade away over time.

This object has two inscriptions in Greek script. The owner's name,
Menekrates, is lightly scratched into the surface, making it an
idealcandidate for surface enhancement with RTI. While cleaning under
the microscope, another inscription was found: a letter that was likely
used to mark the position of one of these now-lost vertical ring handles
with horizontal thumb-rests The granular surface obscuring the upper
half of the letter is likely a weld spot that was used to join the
handles to the body of the cup.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

{{< /q-class >}}
