---
label: 
title: Decorative Collar with Busts of Celestial Deities
short_title: Decorative Collar
type: entry
class: side-by-side
weight: 113
object:
  - id: 3
---

This object may be a decorative attachment for the shaft of a ceremonial
scepter or perhaps a military standard. The exterior is decorated with
six separately cast busts: three facing lion heads terminating in
acanthus foliage, alternating with three facing busts of celestial
deities. First, the moon goddess Luna wearing a chiton and veil over her
shoulder, with her hair pulled back and a crescent moon above her brow.
Next, a bearded and veiled Saturn. The head of the third bust is
missing, but may represent Sol. He wears a cloak (*chlamys*) fastened at
his shoulder. The imagery implies a connection to the cult of Mithras,
an eastern religion that quickly spread across the Roman Empire in part
due to its popularity with soldiers attracted by the promise of life
after death.

The entire outer surface of the collar is mercury gilded. To mercury
gild a metal object, the craftsman first makes an amalgam of gold and
mercury and paints it onto the surface of the object. The object is then
fired at a relatively low temperature, below the melting point of the
silver, which drives a great deal of the mercury away and bonds the gold
to the metal below. This layer of gold is incredibly thin, about 2--20
microns, and can contain 8-25% mercury. Because this layer is so thin,
tarnish of the silver below can form on top of the gilding.

A chemical compound suspended in a gel system was used to dissolve the
silver sulfide. This gel allowed for a controlled application of the
compound at the surface of the gilding.

This chemical compound is a toxic carcinogen, so personal protection
like gloves, a respirator, and protective goggles were necessary.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

{{< /q-class >}}
