Bowl

Sasanian, 6^th^-mid 7^th^ century CE

Silver, gilding

Lent by Lewis M. Dubroff. L2009.4.49

Silver bowls of this type, with a narrow, elliptical shape and ring
foot, are characteristic of Sasanian production during the sixth and
seventh centuries CE and were likely made in workshops connected to the
Sasanian royal court. Silver was a highly valued commodity, due in part
to a lack of abundant sources within the Sasanian empire. Such vessels
were used at lavish banquets and were given as royal gifts, signaling
wealth and prestige.

This bowl was made more impressive by the addition of mercury gilding to
accentuate the figures engraved on its exterior surface. The decoration
itself recalls Dionysian motifs seen throughout earlier Greek and Roman
art, especially on drinking vessels, and evokes an atmosphere of
abundance and pleasure: scrolling vines loaded with grape clusters and
vine leaves are interspersed with bird's nests, and birds, foxes, and
hares play between the tendrils. The survival of Dionysian imagery in
Sasanian art, as well as the adoption and adaptation of metalworking
techniques, attests to the intercultural connections that existed
between the Roman, Byzantine, and Sasanian empires in Late Antiquity.

In the before treatment image, it is clear how tarnish can obscure the
luxurious materiality of mercury gilded silver. The gilded surface is
damaged from a combination of its age, archaeological context, and
previous campaigns of cleaning. A chemical compound suspended in a gel
system was used to dissolve the silver sulfide. This gel allowed for a
controlled application of the compound at the surface of the gilding.

A Middle Persian inscription was punched on the underside of the vessel
within the ring foot, and gives the male name \"Ohrmazd.\". The
elemental composition of the foot was analyzed with portable X-ray
fluorescence spectroscopy; it was found to contain a significantly
higher amount of copper than the bowl. The difference in alloy
composition may suggest that the foot was added at a later date.

*Use your finger to manipulate the angle of the light on the Middle
Persian inscription*

*The Sasanian bowl before treatment*

*Detail of engraving. Note the dotted lines the artist used to create
perspective on the proper right front leg, back leg, and ear*
